## Synopsis

This is a suite of imaging code to determine viral titers from fluorescent micrographs. In a typical application, paired fluorescent images of the cell nucleus and a viral antigen are collected analyzed. The code requires the `EBImage`, `lattice`, and `latticeExtra` packages and can make use of the (private) `EBImageExtra` package.

## Overview

The tools in this package have primarily been developed to determine viral titers from multi-well culture dishes. Typically, pairs of images are collected at different multiplicities of infection or **moi**. The moi can be expressed as viral particles (VP) per cell *or* infectious units (IU) per cell *or* a volume (ml, ul, nl, pl or fl) per cell. The default order of images is the nucleus (typically a DAPI image) before the fluorescent viral antigen. However, a different order and different number of images per set can be accommodated with optional arguments.

The sets of images associated with each moi can occur in two forms. Most typically, they are collected as individual image files in separate directories where each directory is named for the well such as A1, A2, and so on. In this case, the files within a directory are identified sequentially as file001.tif, file002.tif, etc. Alternatively, the paired images for each moi can be a set of multi-layered TIFF file where the member of each set includes the DNA and viral antigen images.

Additional information about the experiment must be provided in a "phenotype" data frame that **must** contain the moi and unit of measure (as VP,  ml, ul, nl, etc). This data frame can contain additional information describing the experiment. The "phenotype" data are merged with the image data for further analysis.

Individual cells are identified by the DNA stain which is used to generate a nuclear mask. This nuclear mask is applied to the viral antigen image file and the mean fluorescence intensity is measured for each cell defined by the nuclear mask. An option is provided to expand or contract the size of the nuclear mask in order to include more or less of the associated cytoplasm. See the help function for `parseImages()`, `trimMask()` and `cellMask()` for more details and additional options to optimize detection. 

## Significant Changes

### Version 0.1.0.1

Many options for controlling the plots generated by `plotFit` have been introduced. The default x-axis label provides more useful information. `plotOneFit` has been removed since `plotFit` now provides the ability to control graphic elements. Related changes have been made to `getTiter` and `getEC63`. Strip labels for the background plotting functions `plotHist` and `plotDens` has been corrected to respect the order of factors.

### Version 0.0.6.0

The function `getCutoff` has been added to automatically identify and optionally plot optimal cutoff values for trimming nuclear masks.

### Version 0.0.5.2

`mergePdata` now has the `formatString` option to force the phenodata and image data use the same format for wells (a conflict such as "A1" vs "A01" can be fixed.)

The `parseImages` function should no longer fail if a fluorescent target image has no cells.

Data can now include a prefix that serves as an identifier to the plate. The unique identifier for each well is now called `label`. This means that a well identified as 2A6 is parsed as `label = 2A6`, `prefix = 1`, `well = "A6"`, `row = "A"` and `column = 6`. Not all of the code (`mergePdata` in particular) accommodates this new variable and new organization. Helpful (hopefully) information is provided where needed. Note that using a variable named `label` for another reason in the phenodata may create a conflict with this. Not entirely certain.

A `which.images = NULL` option has be introduced for `checkImages` to handle images that are not organized as paired images. 

### Version > 0.0.3.2

The `setZero` function was incorrect in versions prior to 0.0.3.2 by failing to replicate the background pixel value for each frame and allowing it to be replicated across frames instead. 

Area calculations in `getVal` and `trimMask` now use `tabulate` for an 8-fold greater efficiency. In version 0.0.3.x, `getTiter` has been changed to actually report the titer as infectious units per ml (if the unit attribute is a known volume unit). The previous functionality is preserved in `getEC63`. The `getVal` function has been simplified with logic to assign the `computeFeatures` function according to the parameter being measured. The arguments for `parseImages` have been shortened (back) to `args.nMask` and `args.cMask`

## Pre-installation Requirements
 
It appears that additional software used for R development is needed to install these libraries. Windows requires Rtools. Instructions for these steps are provided below. Nothing more may be needed for macOS. However, just in case this software *is* needed, macOS instructions are provided below. 

**Windows**  To install and compile these packages from Github, you probably need the `Rtools` bundle that provides a C/C++ and Fortran compiler. The version current as of May 2023 is Rtools42. I recommend using the default parameters through the [Rtools42 installer](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/rtools42/files/rtools42-5355-5357.exe). This uses the default installation location of C:\rtools42 and sets the necessary environment variables. Software installed in this location requires administrator access on Windows.

**macOS**  For R 4.3.0 and higher you need Xcode and a Fortran compiler. This would be the universal GNU Fortran 12.2 compiler. Instructions and links, including instructions for earlier versions of R, are available at [R for macOS](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/macosx/tools). Software installed almost certainly requires macOS administrator rights.

## Installation

With the appropriate development tools available (see Pre-installation Requirements above), several steps are necessary to install this code from github and related packages from the Bioconductor.

First, the supporting package `EBImage` must be installed from the Bioconductor. As of R.3.6, this is done with `BiocManager` as follows. Be sure to have the appropriate version of R installed before using `BiocManager`. It seems that the rules governing how to install packages from the Bioconductor as well as the currently acceptable version of `BiocManager` change frequently and these instructions could become outdated.
```
 if (!requireNamespace("BiocManager", quietly = TRUE))
    install.packages("BiocManager")
  BiocManager::install("EBImage")
```
Second, ensure that the `devtools` and `latticeExtra` packages are installed.
```
  install.packages("devtools")
  install.packages("latticeExtra")
```
Finally, the `virustiter` package can be installed from GitHub.
```
  library(devtools)
  install_github("ornelles/virustiter")
```
It also may be useful to install the `EBImageExtra` package from Github. This provides many functions I use for processing microscopic images. Keep in mind that this package is still under development.
```
  require(devtools)
  install_github("ornelles/EBImageExtra")
```
Once the necessary packages are installed, the need to be loaded like a typical R package.
```
  library(virustiter)
  library(EBImageExtra) # If desired/needed
```

## Working notes

Phenotype data is expected as a data frame with the following variables:
```
  moi   A numeric value, which can be named 'x', indicating the multiplicity
  unit  A character string identifying the units per cell such as "VP "IU "ul or "ml"
```
and must include *either* `well` *or* `file` *but not both*:
```
  well  A character string indicated the well such as "A1" or "a01" or "a0001"
  file  The filename as a character string of the multi-layered TIFF file
```
An example with images in individual files in folders is shown here. `parseImages(path)` will examine the folder specified by `path` in order to determine if it contains multi-layered tiff files or additional folders with individual image files and process the files accordingly. `checkImages(path)` performs the same logic without processing the data. This function is useful to ensure that the images are organized appropriately before analysis.
```
  path <- system.file("extdata", "by_folder", package = "virustiter")
  fpd <- system.file("extdata", "by_folder/phenoData.csv", package = "virustiter")
  
  img <- getImages(path)
  df <- parseImages(img)
  pd <- read.csv(fpd)
  df <- mergePdata(pd, df)
  bg <- getBgnd(df)  # this is less than optimal, see the analysis below
  df <- score(df, bg)
  res <- tally(df)
  fm <- getFit(res)
  plotFit(fm)
```
An example with stacked images in a single folder is shown here. Repeat the above sample code using the new files.
```
  path <- system.file("extdata", "by_stack", package = "virustiter")
  fpd <- system.file("extdata", "by_stack/phenoData.csv", package = "virustiter")
```
A typical workflow using 12-bit fluorescent images with default parameters for all functions is provided here:
```
   img <- getImages()     # read paired images with EBImage
   df <- parseImages(img) # extract nuclear information and target mfi

   pd <- data.frame(file = levels(df$file), moi = moi, unit = unit),
     Or for a single plate organized by well:,
   pd <- data.frame(well.info(unique(df$well)), moi = moi, unit = unit),
     Or if multiple plates are used:,
   pd <- data.frame(well.info(unique(df$labels)), moi = moi, unit = unit),

   df  <- mergePdata(pd, df) # merge with phenotype data in 'pd'
   bg <- getBgnd(df)     # determine background level by control
   df  <- score(df, bg)  # assign positive values from bg
   res <- tally(df)      # tally positives and negatives and return data.frame
   fm  <- getFit(res)    # get model fit(s) from either res or scored data frame
   cf  <- getTiter(fm)   # get value in units required for MOI of 1 and 95% CI
```
Supporting functions include these as well as others:
```
   usage()             # show this list of supporting functions
   checkImages(path)   # check (and display) paired images
   list.images(path)   # list image files in the given path
   getZero(x)          # find most common non-zero pixel in each image frame
   setZero(x)          # rescale each image frame to the most common zero value
   nucMask(dapi)       # extract nuclear mask from dapi image(s) or file(s)
   trimMask(mask)      # remove objects based on size from mask
   cellMask(mask)      # expand a nuclear mask into a cell mask
   edgeObjects(mask)   # identify objects near the edge of a mask
   findObjects(expr, df) # find objects in data.frame identified by expr
   getVal(mask, ref)   # extract one 'computeFeatures' value using mask and ref
   p2p()               # interactively measure point-to-point distances
   plotHist(df)        # histogram of each well with optional background values
   plotDens(df)        # calculate and show background values with densityplot
   plotPlate(df)       # plot plate showing positives
   plotWell(df, well)  # plot each cell in a well showing positives and sizes
   plotFit(fm)         # plot fit(s) with calculated values using base graphics
   addOneFit(fm)       # add best-fit line to existing base graph
   getAIC(df, bg)      # evaluate fitted model(s) from df at bg values
   getTiter(fm)        # get titer as IU per ml (if volume units were used)
   getEC63(fm)         # get volume required for 1 infectious units +/- 95% CI
   getShift(mask, tgt) # get optimal x-y shift to align tgt with (nuc) mask
   translate(x, v)     # apply (optimal) x-y shift in v to image x
```
Often the background value needs to be optimized with parameters provided to `getBgnd()` as well as those provided to `parseImages()`. Use the plotting tools `plotDens()` and `plotHist()` to evaluate different choices of background values.

The sample data provided here yields a less than ideal cutoff value for the background when using default settings. The control values (moi of 0) are so tight that the default value of `mult = 2.5` for the 'mad' multiplier is too generous.

The following code demonstrates one method of exploring values near the optimal cutoff value with `getAIC()`. The AIC values point to two possible background values. The results from `plotHist()` show that the values with `mult` = 1.55 or 1.95 may be better than the default value of 2.5.
```
  mm <- seq(1, 2.5, 0.05)
  bg <- sapply(mm, function(m) getBgnd(df, mult = m))
  aic <- getAIC(df, bg)
  plot(mm, aic, type = "b") # by AIC, the best mult value is 2.65
  plotHist(df, bg[mm == 2.5], main = "Default 'mult' value = 2.5")
  opt.mm <- mm[which.min(aic)]
  plotHist(df, bg[opt.mm], main = sprintf("Optimal 'mult' value = %0.2f", opt.mm))
```  
## Stuff to do

- Develop a good vignette for this and the `EBImageExtra` package
- Develop a workflow for determining the optimal nuclear mask
- Adjust the code to work more robustly with the new `prefix` variable
- Optimize `parseImages` to take advantage of multiple cores (parallel computing)

## License

GPL-3
